# MyMotifFinding

This project is designed to identify motifs in peak sequences based on the known motif pwms (position weighted matrix). It provides a Python package that would load reference genome, calculate scores of identified motifs, and compute the enrichment of motifs in bound sequences. The output is in the form of html.

**How to run the package**:

**NOTE**: We recommend using JupyterHub to run this package due to possible operating system conflicts and problems regarding package installment. The whole running process could span **half an hour**!

**First Clone this repository**:

`git clone https://github.com/SaintLucifur/MyMotifFinding.git`

* Go into the directory

`cd MyMotifFinding`

* Go into the subdirectory

`cd MyMotifFinding`

* Then run the following command

`python MyMotifFinding.py -f <path_to_fasta_ref> -transfac <taxonomic group> -O <output_directory> <path_to_peaks_file>`

### For simple demo (just to give you a sense of what the output would be):

On **Datahub**, run the following command:

`python MyMotifFinding.py -f ~/public/lab5/GRCm38.chr17.fa -transfac nematodes -O demo Test/peaks.txt`

## **Arguments** (required):
* `-f`: path to the indexed reference genome in fasta format
* `-transfac`: taxonomic group of the species of the peaks data, available options are `fungi`, `insects`, `nematodes`, `plants`, `urochordates`, `vertebrates` (vertebrates will take a long time)
* `-O`: path to the directory in which the output (**html file**) is written (will create one if it does not exist)
* path to the **HOMER** peaks.txt output

### **Scripts**:

*Background_Frequency.py*: Calculates the background frequencies of nucleotides from a genome sequence in comparison to a list of sequences obtained from peaks.

*MyMotifFinding.py*: Performs motif finding in a provided peaks file.

*findPValue.py*: Computes the enrichment for each motif and provides Fisher Exact Test p-values.

*utils.py*: Provides utility functions for loading and processing data, basic calculation on pfms, pwms, calculating enrichment and p-value for motifs.

## **Prerequisites**:

**Ensure you have the following installed on your system**:
1. Python 3.8 or higher
3. NumPy
4. SciPy

## **Getting Started**:

**Clone this repository**:
`git clone https://github.com/SaintLucifur/MyMotifFinding.git`

## **Instructions**:

The order to run the scripts would be:

1. Run **MyMotifFinding.py** with required parameters (**HOMER** peaks file, faidx Indexed Referencce Genome fasta file, and transfac file from **JASPAR**):

    `python MyMotifFinding.py -f <path_to_fasta_ref> -transfac <taxonomic group> -O <output_directory> <path_to_peaks_file>`

**Please replace <path_to_fasta_ref>, <output_file>, <path_to_peaks_file>, and <path_to_fac_file> with your actual file paths.**

## **Testing**:

Minimal test datasets are included in the `Test` folder (you can find it under `MyMotifFinding` folder）for testing purposes.
Datasets in `Test`:
* `peaks.txt`: generated by **HOMER** `findPeaks` function
* `test.transfac`: a small sample of PWMs, including one of Sox2/Oct4 transcription factor from **JASPAR**
* `GRCm38.chr17.fa`: this indexed fasta file is in `~/public/lab5`, please reference to this location for your fasta file

You can run the scripts with these datasets to verify the functionality of the scripts.

## **Contributing**:

If you wish to contribute to this project, please create your own fork of this repository and submit a pull request.

**License**:

This project is licensed under the MIT License.
